Once upon a time, television ruled the
world. It created stars, sold dreams,
and made networks and advertisers
billions of dollars by monetizing our
attention. But that era didn't die. It
just moved. The golden age of television
is on YouTube. And if you understand how
it works, you'll understand how to turn
attention into real revenue, just like
the biggest brands and creators do. I'm
Neil Patel. At my ad agency, NP Digital,
we run ads for some of the most
recognizable brands in the world. And
today, I'm breaking down why YouTube has
become the new television, why ad
dollars that once fueled prime time are
shifting here, and what that means for
advertisers who want more customers and
creators who want to grow their
influence. Chapter one, why YouTube
replaced television. For 70 years,
television worked the same way. You
bought airtime, you broadcast to
millions, and you hoped and hoped enough
people care. Network sold shows and
blocks. Advertisers bought 30 secondond
spots during the Super Bowl, during
Seinfeld, during Friends. They paid for
reach, but they never really knew who
was watching. Sure, there were ratings,
demographics, households, but it was all
a guess. You targeted women 25 to 54 or
men 18 to 49 and cross your fingers that
your message landed with the right
person at the right time. And for
decades, it worked because there were
only few channels, limited options.
People just watch whatever was on. But
then the internet happened and
everything fragmented. First cable
exploded into hundreds of channels. Then
streaming killed the TV schedule. And
now we live in a world where everyone
has their own personalized feed curated
by AI, shaped by their interests,
delivered to the device in their hand.
YouTube just didn't compete with
television. It replaced it. According to
Neielen, YouTube is now the number one
streaming platform on TV screens in the
United States, beating Netflix, Hulu,
Disney Plus, every other service. People
aren't just watching YouTube on their
phones anymore. They're casting it to
their living room TVs. They're choosing
it over traditional streaming. And
here's what separates YouTube from
everything that came before. YouTube
didn't replace TV by being bigger. It
replaced TV by being smarter. Because on
YouTube, there's no such thing as
everyone being forced to watch the same
thing in the living room anymore. Sure,
streaming services try to personalize.
Netflix gives you profiles. Hulu
recommends shows, but that's surface
level. They predict what you may like,
not what you actually want to watch
next. YouTube change it. It didn't just
recommend, it understood intent. People
came searching for answers, ideas,
inspiration. And in that process,
YouTube gave everyone a voice. creators
spoke up and viewers found what they
didn't even know they were looking for.
YouTube democratized video and suddenly
everyone could find their corner of the
world online. From that yoga teacher in
a small town to a guy showing you how to
fix your car filter, YouTube turned
curiosity into connection. It wasn't
about predicting what you'd watch. It
was about helping you discover what you
care about. And here's what makes it
different. You still have access to
everything. the Super Bowl, award shows,
music videos from artists you love, all
the big mainstream moments, but you're
also getting hyperspecific content
tailored to exactly what you care about.
So, when millions show up for the Super
Bowl on YouTube, they're not there
because it's the only thing on. They
chose it. They're engaged. They're
connected to that moment in a way TV
audiences never work. Every audience on
YouTube, whether it's 100 million
watching a major event or a 100,000
watching a niche creator, is higher
quality because everyone opted in. And
that opt-in model, it's what turned
YouTube into something completely
different from traditional TV. YouTube
is a new television network. Except
instead of just a handful of channels,
there are over a 100 million. And every
single one of them is programming for a
specific audience. Billions of viewers
are now watching their own version of
prime time, each with a unique lineup of
content personalized by YouTube's
recommendation system. What's even more
fascinating is that creators on YouTube
built this. Not YouTube executives, not
ad agency, individual creators who saw a
niche that wasn't being served and said,
"I'll make content for these people."
They built communities from scratch.
They figured out what their audiences
actually wanted. They created a trust
that makes this whole model work. Every
niche has its own community, its own
stars, its own culture, fitness, tech,
finance, skincare, gaming, cooking. And
when you advertise on YouTube, you're
not just buying reach, you're buying
context. Your ad doesn't just appear
next to content. appears next to trusted
content. Content that people choose.
Content that aligns with their interest.
The internet created chaos. Billions of
options. Endless choices. Audiences
scattered everywhere. But then YouTube
figured it out. Not by forcing everyone
back into the same room, but by helping
people find exactly what they were
looking for. Chaos didn't destroy
audiences. It sorted them. TV. Guess who
was watching? YouTube knows. And that
changes everything. Chapter 2. How
people actually bought. 10 years ago, if
I wanted to buy something, the path was
simple. You see a commercial, visit a
store, compare a few options, make a
decision. Today, the same purchase looks
like a pinball machine bouncing between
YouTube reviews, Reddit threads,
comparison sites, and AI
recommendations. There's no straight
line anymore. Just constant ricochets
through information until something
clicks. And it doesn't happen step by
step. It happens all at once. You're
discovering, comparing, and deciding in
real time across a dozen platforms,
often before you even realize you're
shopping. According to Google's
research, 50% of consumers now watch an
online video before making a purchase.
That's up from just 34% 4 years ago.
Half of all purchasing decisions now
involve video research. People aren't
just killing time on YouTube. They're
learning, comparing, deciding. They're
building a mental short list of which
brands they trust. According to a survey
conducted by Canar, 80% of viewers in
the United States agree that YouTube
helps them make more confident shopping
decisions. But here's where most
advertisers still get it wrong. The
traditional approach thinks in two
extremes. Awareness at the top and
conversion at the bottom. At the top,
you blast your message to everyone.
Billboards, TV commercials, social media
ads, hoping someone remembers your brand
when they need it months later. At the
bottom, you target people searching.
someone typing in best air purifier into
Google because they're already ready to
buy right now. But here's the problem.
There's this massive space in between
that most advertisers completely ignore.
And that's where the real decisions are
being made because the lower funnel
isn't just search anymore. People have
real purchase intent while they're
watching YouTube videos, scrolling
Google Discover, even checking their
Gmail. They're ready to buy. They're
just not on Google search yet. And
here's what makes YouTube so powerful.
It's not just tracking what you're
watching right now. It's capturing
signals across everything you do. What
you searched for last week, which videos
you watched yesterday, what you clicked
on but didn't buy. YouTube can tell
you're in the market for air purifier,
even when you're watching a cooking
video. That's called audience-based
targeting, reaching the right person
regardless of what they're watching at
the exact moment. And Google's data
proves it. When they launched a new AI
powered campaign built to reach people
earlier in the journey, they found
something surprising. Nearly 70% of the
people who converted hadn't searched for
that brand in the previous 30 days. In
other words, the buying decision
happened before search. These weren't
people typing best air purifier. There
were people discovering, comparing, and
deciding long before they even reached
the search bar. Think about your own
behavior. When you're about to buy
something, really about to buy, not just
curious. What do you do? You watch that
final review. You check out what people
are saying. Then life happens. You move
on to a music video, a cooking tutorial,
something totally unrelated. Then you
see an ad for that air purifier, and
suddenly you remember, "Oh yeah, I was
going to buy that." YouTube knew you
were still in the market even when you
forgot. You had intank. You just weren't
searching yet. That's the window most
advertisers miss completely. And it's
massive because by the time someone
searches for your product on Google, the
game is already over. They've already
decided which three brands they're
considering. They've already formed
their preferences. They've already
decided who they trust. Chapter three,
why YouTube wins where TV never could.
In the '9s, if Coca-Cola wanted to reach
you, they bought a commercial slot
during must-see TV. They showed the same
ad to everyone watching Friends. Whether
you drank soda or not, whether you cared
about Coke or not, they had reach.
Millions of eyeballs, but zero
relevance. It was interruptionbased
advertising. The goal was simple. show
up enough times that when you walked
into a store, you'd remember the brand.
But today, that model is broken because
advertisers used to have to choose
massive reach with no targeting or
precise targeting with limited scale.
YouTube is a first platform that gives
you both. Here's what makes it
different. When you run an ad on other
social platforms, you're interrupting
someone's scroll. They're in killtime
mode, passive, half-paying attention.
When you run an ad on traditional TV or
streaming services, you're interrupting
the show. They're waiting for you to
finish so they can get you back to what
they actually want you to watch. But on
YouTube, the platform is built
differently. When someone's watching a
15-minute product review, swiping
through shorts, or browsing their feed,
they're there for video content. They
chose to open YouTube. They're engaged
with that format. The common thread
isn't the video length. It's that people
come to YouTube with intent to learn
something, to research something, to
solve something. Even when it's
entertainment, it's chosen entertainment
about topics they care about. And here's
what makes this different. Creators on
YouTube have a skin in the game. They
only get paid when people actually
watch. So, they become experts at making
content that holds attention. This is
why YouTube has a higher average watch
time than other social networks from our
study at NP Digital. So, when your ad
shows up in that environment, you're
appearing in a context where people are
already engaged, already paying
attention, already interested in video
content. And YouTube does this at a
scale that niche platforms can't touch.
YouTube isn't just showing your ad next
to relevant content. It's finding the
right people based on everything that
they do on the platform. What they
search for, what they watch, what they
skip, what makes them click,
audience-based targeting, working across
3 billion users monthly. Every possible
interest, every niche, every community.
That combination, deep personalization
in the right context at massive scale is
what separates YouTube from everything
else. Old TV had reach without
relevance. Niche platforms have
relevance without reach. YouTube has
both. This is why YouTube ads cry three
times higher brand lift than the same
ads on social media. It's not magic.
It's context relevance and reach working
together. Chapter four, how to find your
next customer. So, how do you actually
reach people in the stage at scale? This
is where the advertising technology has
evolved dramatically. For years, the
only way to target people midfunnel was
suggest. You pick broad interest
categories. Let's say people interested
in home improvement and hope some of
them were actually close to buying. Or
you retarget people who visited your
website. But that only works if they
already knew you existed. The problem?
You're either too broad and wasteful or
too narrow and limited. Google built
something called demand gen, an
advertising campaign type specifically
designed to find people in this mid to
lowerf funnel moment. people who are
ready to consider your brand even if
they've never heard of you. It operates
across YouTube shorts and stream videos,
YouTube feeds, Google discover and
Gmail. And unlike search ads, demand
genen lets you combine video, image, and
text into one campaign. You can tell
stories, build emotions, create desire,
the same way TV used to, but with the
precision of digital targeting. It works
best when you upload a mix of creatives,
like a 15-second video, 30-second video,
images, even headlines and descriptions
for your ads, and then the system
automatically formats and places them
where they'll perform the best. Vertical
video for shorts, horizontal for
instream, image carousels for feeds. The
scale is massive, up to 3 billion users
monthly. But that scale isn't the
interesting part. The targeting is.
Demand genen helps you find more people
like your best customers. You start by
uploading your own data, a list of
customers who have already bought from
you or people who have regularly engaged
with your YouTube channel. From there,
Google's AI looks at patterns across
everything it knows across its ecosystem
and it finds people who behave like your
best customers. That's how it helps you
reach new audiences and attract buyers
who have never even heard of your brand
before. Let me show you how this works.
Take a National Trade School client of
ours. They turn to YouTube to get more
student leads on a tight budget. They
launch a few different demand genen
campaigns. One aimed at Gen Z using
YouTube shorts to reach students
midscroll and another focused on
veterans around Veterans Day. Each
campaign had its own creative approach.
For veterans, they ran patriotic
testimonials. For younger prospects,
they used high energy campus tour
videos. The result, an 11% increase in
student increase year-over-year while
spending 15% less. And here's the
kicker. The extra reach boosted search
demand, too, cutting their cost per lead
on paid search by 32%. Now, you may
think this making commercials sounds
expensive. The biggest constraint in
advertising used to be production, how
long it takes to create assets, how much
it costs to test variations. But today,
production happens inside the same
platform as media buying. You can test
20 creative versions and the time it
used to take to produce too. And even if
you don't have a big budget for content
or production, demand genen's built-in
AI can help. All you have to do is
upload a few basics. Your logo, brand
images, ad copy, and business name. From
there, it automatically creates videos
and images designed to expand your reach
and boost your campaign performance.
This is how even a small local business
with 100 customers can compete with
national brands. system can tell the
difference between someone casually
browsing and someone actively in market.
Someone watching a single video about
air purifiers probably just curious.
Someone who watched three reviews,
searched best air purifier for allergies
and then watch a comparison video, that
person is close to buying. The system
adjusts in real time, showing different
creative, different messaging, different
call to actions based on where someone
actually is in their journey. You're not
just broadcasting to everyone hoping
someone cares. You're reaching people
who are already showing signs that
they're ready to consider a solution
right before your competitors even know
they exist. The ad dollars that once
built TV empires are moving to YouTube.
This is the new prime time. And a quick
heads up, if you're in the US, Google is
offering $2,000 in ad credits when you
put $1,000 in your first demand and
genen campaign. You can grab it by going
to g.co/ads/offer.
It runs through December 31st or until
they run